Editorial review: Document customizable <select> elements (#38470)
mdn/content: files/en-us/learn_web_development/extensions/forms/customizable_select/index.md

---
title: Customizable select elements
slug: Learn_web_development/Extensions/Forms/Customizable_select
page-type: learn-module-chapter
---

{{LearnSidebar}}

> This article explains how to use dedicated, modern HTML and CSS features together to create fully-customized {{htmlelement("select")}} elements. This includes having full control over styling the select button, drop-down picker, arrow icon, checkbox to indicate which item is currently selected, each individual {{htmlelement("option")}} element, and more besides.

Author: Good feedback. I've updated the sentence to:

> This includes having full control over styling the select button, drop-down picker, arrow icon, current selection checkmark, and each individual {{htmlelement("option")}} element.

> This article explains how to use dedicated, modern HTML and CSS features together to create fully-customized {{htmlelement("select")}} elements. This includes having full control over styling the select button, drop-down picker, arrow icon, checkbox to indicate which item is currently selected, each individual {{htmlelement("option")}} element, and more besides.

Author: (in my next commit)

## Background

Traditionally it has been difficult to customize the look and feel of `<select>` elements because they contain internals that are styled at the operating system level, which can't be targeted using CSS. This includes the drop-down picker, arrow icon, etc.

> Previously, the best available option aside from using a custom JavaScript library was to set an {{cssxref("appearance")}} value of `none` on the `<select>` element to strip away some of the OS-level styling, and then use CSS to customize the bits that cna be styled. This technique is explained in [Advanced form styling](/en-US/docs/Learn_web_development/Extensions/Forms/Advanced_form_styling).

Author: Fixed; thanks!

- The {{cssxref("::picker()", "::picker(select)")}} pseudo-element, which targets the entire contents of the select drop-down menu, otherwise known as the **picker**. The picker contains everything inside the `<select>` element that isn't the button and the `<selectedcontent>`.
- The {{cssxref("appearance")}} property value `base-select`, which opts the `<select>` element and the `::picker(select)` pseudo-element into the browser-defined default styles and behavior for customizable select.
- The {{cssxref(":open")}} pseudo-class, which targets the select `<button>` when the picker (`::picker(select)`) is open.
- The {{cssxref("::picker-icon")}} pseudo-element, which targets the picker icon inside the select `<button>` — the down-facing arrow on the inline-end side.
- The {{cssxref(":checked")}} pseudo-class, which targets the currently-selected `<option>` element.

> - The {{cssxref("::checkmark")}} pseudo-element, which targets the checkmark placed inside the currently-selected `<option>` element to provide a visual indication of which one is selected.

Reviewer: Customizable select also officially sanctions putting `<div>` and non-interactive [phrasing content](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/dom.html#phrasing-content) inside `<option>`s, whereas before you were only supposed to put text content in it. Not sure if that's worth calling out in this list especially since you have examples below where `<span>` is used, but it could be called out here.

Reviewer: Ah I see it called out below: 

> Traditionally, `<option>` elements could only contain text, but in a customizable select you can include markup structures including images and more besides. In our example, each `<option>` contains two {{htmlelement("span")}} elements containing an icon and a text label respectively, allowing each one to be styled and positioned independently.

I guess that's fine as-is

Author: I think this is mostly fine, but just to make sure, I've added a sentence to the first bullet of the first list:

> These work just the same as in "classic" selects, except that they have additional permitted content types.

> In addition, the select `<button>` and the picker have the following behavior assigned to them automatically:

Reviewer: Could also be worth mentioning somewhere that this `<button>` should be the first child element of the select element in order to work properly, and the browser makes it inert by default which prevents it from having interactive children that work as you might expect.

This is done via `interactivity: inert`, so authors can remove the inertness if they want but it might also break some event handling stuff we've built.

`interactivity` is also shipping after customizable select so right now its hard coded to be inert, we are going to properly move it to a UA style in a bit - undoing inertness won't work yet.

> In addition, the select `<button>` and the picker have the following behavior assigned to them automatically:

Reviewer: Yeah it's probably a bad idea. We probably shouldn't suggest that authors can make it not inert.

> In addition, the select `<button>` and the picker have the following behavior assigned to them automatically:

Reviewer: I made a change to the proposed UA styles to add !important to the interactivity rule, so now authors will never be able to make content inside the button interactive.

> In addition, the select `<button>` and the picker have the following behavior assigned to them automatically:

Reviewer 2: thank you very much @josepharhar

<form>
  <p>
    <label for="pet-select">Select pet:</label>
    <select id="pet-select">
      <button>
        <selectedcontent></selectedcontent>
      </button>

      <option value="">Please select a pet</option>
      <option value="cat">
        <span class="icon">🐱</span><span class="option-label">Cat</span>
      </option>
      <option value="dog">
        <span class="icon">🐶</span><span class="option-label">Dog</span>
      </option>
      <option value="hamster">
        <span class="icon">🐹</span><span class="option-label">Hamster</span>
      </option>
      <option value="chicken">
        <span class="icon">🐔</span><span class="option-label">Chicken</span>
      </option>
      <option value="fish">
        <span class="icon">🐟</span><span class="option-label">Fish</span>
      </option>
      <option value="snake">
        <span class="icon">🐍</span><span class="option-label">Snake</span>
      </option>
    </select>
  </p>
</form>
```

This is nearly the same as "classic" `<select>` markup, with the following differences:

> - The `<button><selectedcontent></selectedcontent></button>` structure represents the select {{htmlelement("button")}}; the {{htmlelement("selectedcontent")}} element contains a clone of the currently-selected {{htmlelement("option")}} (created using {{domxref("Node.cloneNode", "cloneNode()")}} under the hood). This allows you to select and [adjust the styling of the selected `<option>` contents as shown inside the select button](#adjusting_the_styling_of_the_selected_option_contents_inside_the_select_button). If this structure is not included in your markup, the browser will place the selected option content inside the select button implicitly, but you won't be able to select it using CSS.

Author: I've had a think about this, and updated it to:

> If this structure is not included in your markup, the browser will fall back to rendering the selected option's text inside the default button, and you won't be able to style it as easily.

Probably not worth saying anything more just for now?

> - The `<button><selectedcontent></selectedcontent></button>` structure represents the select {{htmlelement("button")}}; the {{htmlelement("selectedcontent")}} element contains a clone of the currently-selected {{htmlelement("option")}} (created using {{domxref("Node.cloneNode", "cloneNode()")}} under the hood). This allows you to select and [adjust the styling of the selected `<option>` contents as shown inside the select button](#adjusting_the_styling_of_the_selected_option_contents_inside_the_select_button). If this structure is not included in your markup, the browser will place the selected option content inside the select button implicitly, but you won't be able to select it using CSS.

Author: @josepharhar no worries at all — the extra context and background are really helpful!

## Opting in to the custom select rendering

To opt-in to the custom select functionality, your `<select>` element and its picker (represented by the `::picker(select)` pseudo-element) both need to have an {{cssxref("appearance")}} value of `base-select` set on them:

```css live-sample___plain-render live-sample___second-render live-sample___third-render live-sample___fourth-render live-sample___full-render
select,
::picker(select) {
  appearance: base-select;
}
```

```css hidden live-sample___second-render live-sample___third-render live-sample___fourth-render live-sample___full-render
* {
  box-sizing: border-box;
}

html {
  font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;
}

body {
  width: 100%;
  padding: 0 10px;
  max-width: 480px;
  margin: 0 auto;
}

h2 {
  font-size: 1.2rem;
}

p {
  display: flex;
  gap: 10px;
}

label {
  width: fit-content;
  align-self: center;
}

select {
  flex: 1;
}
```

> You can choose to opt-in one or the other, but in most cases you'll want to opt-in both.

Reviewer: The picker can't be opted in to base-select unless the select element itself is too. I agree that in most cases you'll want to opt-in both.

```css live-sample___third-render live-sample___fourth-render live-sample___full-render
option {
  display: flex;
  justify-content: flex-start;
  gap: 20px;

  border: 2px solid #ddd;
  background: #eee;
  padding: 10px;
  transition: 0.4s;
}
```

> [!NOTE]
> Customizable `<select>` element `<option>`s have `display: flex` set on them by default, but it is included in our stylesheet anyway to clarify what is going on.

Next, a combination of the {{cssxref(":first-of-type")}}, {{cssxref(":last-of-type")}}, and {{cssxref(":not()")}} pseudo-classes is used to set an appropriate {{cssxref("border-radius")}} on the top and bottom corners of the picker, and remove the {{cssxref("border-bottom")}} from all `<option>` elements except the last one so the borders don't look messy and doubled-up:

```css live-sample___third-render live-sample___fourth-render live-sample___full-render
option:first-of-type {
  border-radius: 8px 8px 0 0;
}

option:last-of-type {
  border-radius: 0 0 8px 8px;
}

option:not(option:last-of-type) {
  border-bottom: none;
}
```

> Next a different `background` color is set on the odd-numbered `<options>` using {{cssxref(":nth-of-type()", ":nth-of-type(odd)")}} to implement zebra-striping, and a different `background` color is set on the `<options>` on focus and hover, to provide a useful visual highlight during selection:

Author: Fixed, both instances, ta!

{{EmbedLiveSample("fourth-render", "100%", "200px")}}

## Animating the picker drop-down using popover states

The customizable `<select>` element's select `button` and picker are automatically given an invoker/popover relationship, as described in [Using the Popover API](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Popover_API/Using). There are many advantages that this brings to `<select>` elements; our example takes advantage of the ability to animate between popover hidden and showing states using transitions. The {{cssxref(":popover-open")}} pseudo-class represents popovers in the showing state.

The technique is covered quickly in this section — read [Animating popovers](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Popover_API/Using#animating_popovers) for a more detailed description.

First of all, the picker is selected using `::picker(select)`, and given an {{cssxref("opacity")}} value of `0` and a `transition` value of `all 0.4s allow-discrete`. This causes all properties that change value when the popover state changes from hidden to showing to animate.

```css live-sample___full-render
::picker(select) {
  opacity: 0;

>   transition: all 0.4s allow-discrete;

Reviewer: I've never tried using transition:all in popover animations, but sounds like it works which is great! Certainly easier to read than explicitly doing display, overlay, etc.

Author: Yup, it works pretty nicely!

}
```

The list of transitioned properties features `opacity`, however it also includes two discrete properties whose values are set by the browser default styles:

- {{cssxref("display")}}
  - : The `display` values changes from `none` to `block` when the popover changes state from hidden to shown. This needs to be animated to ensure that other transitions are visible.
- {{cssxref("overlay")}}

>   - : The `overlay` value changes from `none` to `auto` when the popover changes state from hidden to shown, to promote it to the {{glossary("top layer")}}, then back again when it is hidden to remove it. This needs to be animated to ensure the removal of the popover from the top layer is deferred until the transition completes, again ensuring the transition is visible.

Reviewer: Thanks for calling this out!

> again ensuring the transition is visible

If you don't transition overlay then it should still be visible, but it might cause UA styles to unexpectedly change during the exit animation, and most importantly, the popover won't be in the top layer during the exit animation. These things might not make a difference in simple cases. This text is probably fine as-is.

In our demo, the position of the picker is set relative to its anchor by using the {{cssxref("anchor()")}} function inside its {{cssxref("top")}} and {{cssxref("left")}} property values:

```css live-sample___full-render
::picker(select) {
  top: calc(anchor(bottom) + 1px);
  left: anchor(10%);
}
```

This results in the top edge of the picker always being positioned 1 pixel down from the bottom edge of the select `<button>`, and the left edge of the picker always being positioned `10%` of the select `<button>`'s width across from its left edge.

## Final result

After the last two section, the final updated state of our `<select>` is rendered like this:

{{EmbedLiveSample("full-render", "100%", "200px")}}

## Customizing other classic select features

The above sections have covered all the new functionality available in customizable selects, and shown how it interacts with both classic single-line selects, and related modern features such as popovers and anchor positioning. There are some other `<select>` element features not mentioned above; this section talks about how they work alongside customizable selects:

- [`<select multiple>`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Attributes/multiple)

>   - : When the `multiple` attribute is set on customizable `<select>` elements, the styling works pretty much how you would expect — the styling applied to the `<option>` elements is presented as-is in the multiple select box, and the outer box itself is giving the same styling as the select `<button>` in the single select. Any styling related to the showing and hiding of the picker is ignored.

Reviewer: Customizable select is not supported yet for select multiple. I am planning on working on this as a follow up.

Author: That's interesting to know — I did some testing with `multiple` on my customizable select demo, and it turned out looking OK. It kind of "just worked". I've updated the wording to the following, to make it clear that this isn't official supported yet:

> There isn't currently any official support specified for the `multiple` attribute on customizable `<select>` elements, however the styling works generally OK. The `<option>` elements are displayed as-is inside the multiple select box, and the outer box itself is given the same styling as the select `<button>` in the single select.

Reviewer: Based on the way I implemented it, I expect that applying `appearance: base-select` to a `<select multiple>` will not change anything at all. The option elements inside them should also not be rendering anything interesting besides text content yet. Did you see otherwise? Can you share an example, or is there one inside here?

Author: Sure thing — have a look at https://customizable-select-test.glitch.me/. This is the same code as the demo I explain in the article, but with `multiple` set on the `<select>` element.

Reviewer: Thanks for the demo! I can see that removing appearance:base-select doesn't do anything. I can also see that it renders the same way in firefox, which hasn't implemented customizable select yet. ::checkmark also doesn't show up.

`<select multiple>` on desktop does not use a popup document or native APIs to render the options, so normal CSS stuff like this is likely to already work. The icons also show up in the options since they are just unicode, but actual `<img>` elements or doing layout of stuff inside of an `<option>` won't work.

These are all things I'm going to address when implementing customizable select support for `<select multiple>`, as well as improved keyboard behavior and getting consistent in-page vs popup rendering which is a big issue with the current select multiple. Go ahead and try opening that demo on a mobile device: https://github.com/whatwg/html/issues/8189

Author: Thanks for investigating this, @josepharhar, and helping me understand what is happening. Since at the moment we don't have this, I've updated the `<select multiple>` description to:

> There isn't currently any support specified for the `multiple` attribute on customizable `<select>` elements, but this will be worked on in the future.

- {{htmlelement("optgroup")}}

>   - : The default styling of `<optgroup>` elements is the same as in classic `<select>` elements — bolded and indented less than the contained options. You need to make sure to style the `<optgroup>` elements so they fit into the overall design, and bear in mind that they will behave just as containers are expected to behave in conventioal HTML.

Reviewer: In order to improve on the lack of styling capability for `<optgroup label>`, we added `<legend>` as an allowed child element of `<optgroup>` which replaces the text set in the optgroup's label attribute. The legend element is hooked up to accessibility and everything to act as the optgroup's label. Here is an example:
```html
<select>
  <optgroup>
    <legend>numbers</legend>
    <option>1</option>
    <option>2</option>
  </optgroup>
  <optgroup>
    <legend>letters</legend>
    <option>a</option>
    <option>b</option>
  </optgroup>
</select>
```

Author: Cool, I've added some details about this here and in the `<optgroup>` and `<legend>` pages.

Reviewer: Awesome, thank you!

Customizable `<select>` elements provide a solution to these issues. They allow you to build examples like the following, using only HTML and CSS:

{{EmbedLiveSample("full-render", "100%", "200px")}}

You'll find out how to build this example in the sections below.

## What features comprise a customizable select?

You can build customizable `<select>` elements using the following HTML and CSS features:

- Plain old {{htmlelement("select")}}, {{htmlelement("option")}}, and {{htmlelement("optgroup")}} elements. These work just the same as in "classic" selects, except that they have additional permitted content types. The new features are built on top of existing select functionality as progressive enhancements, meaning that customizable selects can be designed to fall back to "classic" selects in non-supporting browsers.

> - A {{htmlelement("button")}} element included as the first child inside the `<select>` element, which wasn't previously allowed in "classic" selects. When this is included, it replaces the default "button" rendering of the closed `<select>` element. You can then include arbitary content inside the `<button>`, to render whatever you want inside the closed `<select>`. This is comonly known as the **select {{htmlelement("button")}}** (as it is the button you need to press to open the drop-down menu).

Author: Good call. I've used "drop-down picker" throughout but abbreviated it to "picker" after the first mention in each section to lessen the wordage.

> - A {{htmlelement("button")}} element included as the first child inside the `<select>` element, which wasn't previously allowed in "classic" selects. When this is included, it replaces the default "button" rendering of the closed `<select>` element. You can then include arbitary content inside the `<button>`, to render whatever you want inside the closed `<select>`. This is comonly known as the **select {{htmlelement("button")}}** (as it is the button you need to press to open the drop-down menu).

Author: Good point; I ended up removing that sentence, and instead including a note in the "Customizable select markup" section that reads as follows:

> You _can_ include arbitrary content inside the `<button>` to render whatever you want inside the closed `<select>`, but be careful when doing this. What you render can alter the `<select>` element's accessible value exposed to assistive technology.

  > [!NOTE]

>   > The select `<button>` is {{glossary("inert")}} by default, to avoid any strange behavior caused by interactive children.

Author: Good call. I've changed the note to the following, to hopefully clarify this:

> The select `<button>` is {{glossary("inert")}} by default so that if interactive children (for example, links or buttons) are included inside it, it will still be treated like a single button for interaction purposes.

I don't think I need to mention the a11y tree here; when the "inert" link starts working (when that glossary page is published), that will explain exactly what the features of an inert element are, which includes not being exposed to the a11y tree.

- The {{htmlelement("selectedcontent")}} element, which can be included inside the `<select>` element's first child `<button>` element. This contains a clone of the currently-selected `<option>` element's content (created using {{domxref("Node.cloneNode", "cloneNode()")}} under the hood). In effect, this allows you to display the currently selected value inside the closed `<select>` element.

> - The {{cssxref("::picker()", "::picker(select)")}} pseudo-element, which targets the entire contents of the select drop-down menu, otherwise known as the **picker**. The browser puts all of the `<select>` element's content that isn't the first child `<button>` inside the picker.

Author: I ended up using "which targets the entire contents of the picker"

- The {{cssxref("appearance")}} property value `base-select`, which opts the `<select>` element and the `::picker(select)` pseudo-element into the browser-defined default styles and behavior for customizable select.
- The {{cssxref(":open")}} pseudo-class, which targets the select `<button>` when the picker (`::picker(select)`) is open.
- The {{cssxref("::picker-icon")}} pseudo-element, which targets the picker icon inside the select `<button>` — the down-facing arrow on the inline-end side.
- The {{cssxref(":checked")}} pseudo-class, which targets the currently-selected `<option>` element.
- The {{cssxref("::checkmark")}} pseudo-element, which targets the checkmark placed inside the currently-selected `<option>` element to provide a visual indication of which one is selected.

In addition, the select `<button>` and the picker have the following behavior assigned to them automatically:

> - They have an invoker/popover relationship, as specified by the [Popover API](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Popover_API), which brings several advantages such as accessibility semantics, tabbing order adjustments, and the ability to select the picker when open via the {{cssxref(":popover-open")}} pseudo-class. See [Using the Popover API](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Popover_API/Using) for more details of popover behavior.

Author: Got it. I've updated this to

> "..., which provides the ability to select the picker when open via the {{cssxref(":popover-open")}} pseudo-class."

> [!NOTE]
> You can check browser support for customizable `<select>` by viewing the browser compatibility tables on the reference pages listed above.

Let's look at all of the above features in action, by walking through the example you saw earlier.

## Customizable select markup

Our example is a typical {{htmlelement("select")}} menu that allows you to choose a pet. The markup is as follows:

```html live-sample___plain-render live-sample___second-render live-sample___third-render live-sample___fourth-render live-sample___full-render
<form>
  <p>
    <label for="pet-select">Select pet:</label>
    <select id="pet-select">
      <button>
        <selectedcontent></selectedcontent>
      </button>

      <option value="">Please select a pet</option>
      <option value="cat">

>         <span class="icon">🐱</span><span class="option-label">Cat</span>

Author: Good call. I've added these, and included the following note below the markup:

> The [`aria-hidden="true"`](/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Reference/Attributes/aria-hidden) attribute is included on the icons so that they will be hidden from assistive technologies, avoiding the option values being annouced twice (for example, "cat cat").

      <option value="chicken">
        <span class="icon">🐔</span><span class="option-label">Chicken</span>
      </option>
      <option value="fish">
        <span class="icon">🐟</span><span class="option-label">Fish</span>
      </option>
      <option value="snake">
        <span class="icon">🐍</span><span class="option-label">Snake</span>
      </option>
    </select>
  </p>
</form>
```

This is nearly the same as "classic" `<select>` markup, with the following differences:

- The `<button><selectedcontent></selectedcontent></button>` structure represents the select {{htmlelement("button")}}; the {{htmlelement("selectedcontent")}} element contains a clone of the currently-selected {{htmlelement("option")}} (created using {{domxref("Node.cloneNode", "cloneNode()")}} under the hood). This allows you to select and [adjust the styling of the selected `<option>` contents as shown inside the select button](#adjusting_the_styling_of_the_selected_option_contents_inside_the_select_button). If this structure is not included in your markup, the browser will fall back to rendering the selected option's text inside the default button, and you won't be able to style it as easily.

> - The rest of the `<select>` contents represents the picker (the `<select>` drop-down menu). This obviously includes the `<option>` elements representing the different choices in the picker, but you can also include other content if desired.

Author: I did a bunch of testing to see what elements are allowed inside the picker besides the options; it seems to accept audio, video, images, text content, etc. I guess you could do some creative stuff with that. But it probably isn't a good idea. I've changed the bullet to:

> The rest of the `<select>` contents represents the drop-down picker, which is usually limited to the `<option>` elements representing the different choices in the picker. You could include other arbitrary content in the picker, but it is not recommended.

WDYT?

> - The rest of the `<select>` contents represents the picker (the `<select>` drop-down menu). This obviously includes the `<option>` elements representing the different choices in the picker, but you can also include other content if desired.

Reviewer 2: Better.  And yes, the parser allows lots now. But the content model is limited https://whatpr.org/html/10586/dom.html#select-element-inner-content-elements-2

> - The rest of the `<select>` contents represents the picker (the `<select>` drop-down menu). This obviously includes the `<option>` elements representing the different choices in the picker, but you can also include other content if desired.

Author: OK, cool. I've updated the sentence slightly, to:

> You can include other content in the picker, but it is not recommended.

And I've made sure exactly what can be included is correct in the Technical summary on the `<select>` reference page.

> - The rest of the `<select>` contents represents the picker (the `<select>` drop-down menu). This obviously includes the `<option>` elements representing the different choices in the picker, but you can also include other content if desired.

Author: I don't think we need to make too much of a thing about it on this page.

> - Traditionally, `<option>` elements could only contain text, but in a customizable select you can include markup structures including images and more besides. In our example, each `<option>` contains two {{htmlelement("span")}} elements containing an icon and a text label respectively, allowing each one to be styled and positioned independently.

Author: Good suggestion. I used it, with a couple of tweaks to tighten it up a bit.

  > [!NOTE]
  > Because the `<option>` content can contain multi-level DOM sub-trees, not just text nodes, there are rules concerning how the browser should extract the [current `<select>` value](/en-US/docs/Web/API/HTMLSelectElement/value) via JavaScript. The selected `<option>` element's {{domxref("Node.textContent", "textContent")}} property value is retrieved, {{jsxref("String.prototype.trim", "trim()")}} is run on it, and the result is set as the `<select>` value.

> This design allows non-supporting browsers to fall back to a classic `<select>` menu. The `<button><selectedcontent></selectedcontent></button>` structure will be ignored completely, and the non-text `<option>` contents will be stripped out to just leave the text node contents, but the result will still function.

Author: updated

select:focus {
  background: #ddd;
}
```

## Styling the picker icon

To style the picker icon inside the select `<button>` — the little down-facing arrow on the inline-end side — you can target it with the {{cssxref("::picker-icon")}} pseudo-element. In the following code gives the icon a custom {{cssxref("color")}} and a `transition` so that changes to its {{cssxref("rotate")}} property are smoothly animated:

```css live-sample___second-render live-sample___third-render live-sample___fourth-render live-sample___full-render
select::picker-icon {
  color: #999;
  transition: 0.4s rotate;
}
```

Next up, `::picker-icon` is combined with the {{cssxref(":open")}} pseudo-class — which targets the select `<button>` only when the picker is open — to give the icon a `rotate` value of `180deg` when the `<select>` is opened.

```css live-sample___second-render live-sample___third-render live-sample___fourth-render live-sample___full-render
select:open::picker-icon {
  rotate: 180deg;
}
```

Let's have a look at the work so far — note how the picker arrow rotates smoothly through 180 degrees when the `<select>` opens and closes:

{{EmbedLiveSample("second-render", "100%", "200px")}}

> ## Styling the picker drop-down menu

Author: updated

  font-weight: bold;
}
```

## Styling the current selection checkmark

You've probably noticed that when you open the picker to make a selection, the currently selected `<option>` has a checkmark at its inline-start end. This checkmark can be targeted using the {{cssxref("::checkmark")}} pseudo-element. For example, you might want to hide this checkmark (for example, via `display: none`).

You could also choose to do something a bit more interesting with it — earlier on the `<option>` elements were laid out horizontally using flexbox, with the flex items being aligned to the start of the row. In the below rule, the checkmark is moved from the start of the row to the end by setting an {{cssxref("order")}} value on it greater than `0`, and aligning it to the end of the row using an `auto` {{cssxref("margin-left")}} value (see [Alignment and auto margins](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_box_alignment/Box_alignment_in_flexbox#alignment_and_auto_margins)).

Finally, the value of the {{cssxref("content")}} property is set to a different emoji, to set a different icon to display.

```css live-sample___fourth-render live-sample___full-render
option::checkmark {
  order: 1;
  margin-left: auto;

>   content: "☑️";

Author: I added a note below this snippet:

> When changing the icon like this, you should make sure to change it to something that will be announced as a checkmark (or similar) by assistive technologies so it makes sense to their users.

However, I'm not sure how to mark this as decorative, given that it's generated content on a pseudo-element, so there is no HTML to hang `aria-hidden` or `alt=""` (or whatever) on?

>   content: "☑️";

Reviewer 2: CSS content allows for declaring alt text. 

Content: “foo” / “”;

>   content: "☑️";

Author: Oh wow, I had no idea! Another classic TIL moment ;-) That is really cool.

I tried it out, and did some testing using VO, and below is my update for the code and the note. Let me know if you think this is OK.

---

```css
option::checkmark {
  order: 1;
  margin-left: auto;
  content: "☑️" / "";
}
```

> [!NOTE]
> When changing the icon like this, you should mark it as decorative by including an empty alt text string after the slash in the `content` property value, as shown above. This causes assistive technology (AT) to not announce anything for it, so it will make more sense to users of those tools. In general, AT and the underlying platform will handle announcing whether an option is selected or not, so you don't need to do it a second time.

>   content: "☑️";

Reviewer 2: great.  thank you for adding this!

>   content: "☑️";

Reviewer: @scottaohara should we prevent content in `::checkmark` from being announced at all? We did this to `::picker-icon` for now: https://source.chromium.org/chromium/chromium/src/+/main:third_party/blink/renderer/modules/accessibility/ax_object_cache_impl.cc;l=1277-1282;drc=d99d45a2124f7075b201e6bf5db39fec8971d583

If we did, then authors wouldn't need to worry about setting the alt text to an empty string here.

>   content: "☑️";

Reviewer 2: i personally think it'd be a good idea to do the same here.  Yes - there could always be a situation where someone adds text via this `content` property, but that's going to be problematic anyway since it'll change the accname of the option, and as mentioned, that pseudo content won't be available via legacy select rendering.

>   content: "☑️";

Author: It doesn't sound like this affects the docs for now; let me know when/if it is changed in the platform so that I can update the docs.

>   content: "☑️";

Reviewer: Ok, I am going to implement changes to never include ::checkmark in the a11y tree: https://issues.chromium.org/issues/405946933

We should remove the `/ ""` in `content` from this example, and update any notes about this.

>   content: "☑️";

Author: OK, I've removed the alt text, and updated the note to:

> [!NOTE]
> The `::checkmark` and `::picker-icon` pseudo-elements are not included in the accessibility tree, so any generated {{cssxref("content")}} set on them will not be announced by assistive technologies. You should still make sure that any new icon you set visually makes sense for its intended purpose.

I've also added a similar note to the `::checkmark` and `::picker-icon` ref pages.

---

> title: Customizable select elements

Reviewer 3: I'm not seeing this in the sidebar.

Author: This is a tricky situation. We had a bit of back and forth about where to put this guide on Slack, and decided that it wasn't ideal to put in the HTML or CSS sections of the site due to that fact it is a mixture of both, and we don't generally put guides below HTML element reference pages.

So the Forms module seemed like the best place. But, we don't really want to put it in the sidebar because — like some of the other guides — they are not part of the main learning series for this module; they are more of an add-on.

In the future, we are intending to move the Forms module out of Learn web development into its own separate top-level Topic area of MDN, at which point we would definitely put it in the dedicated sidebar.

If you feel really strongly about this, I will look at adding this guide to the current sidebar.

Reviewer 3: If I were you, then I would feel very strongly - because otherwise this doc is far more hidden than it should be.

For myself, you have an eventual plan and I can wait until then :-)

Author: Yeah, you are right. It only took about 10 minutes, so I've added the Customizable selects article into the forms landing page, the prev/next link system, and the sidebar.

slug: Learn_web_development/Extensions/Forms/Customizable_select
page-type: learn-module-chapter
---

{{LearnSidebar}}

> This article explains how to use dedicated, modern HTML and CSS features together to create fully-customized {{htmlelement("select")}} elements. This includes having full control over styling the select button, drop-down picker, arrow icon, current selection checkmark, and each individual {{htmlelement("option")}} element.

Reviewer 3: Here modern is OK.

## Background

> Traditionally it has been difficult to customize the look and feel of `<select>` elements because they contain internals that are styled at the operating system level, which can't be targeted using CSS. This includes the drop-down picker, arrow icon, etc.

Reviewer 3: I believe it was you who told me once that etc. and so on are frowned upon, as not handled well by some accessibility tools.

```suggestion
Traditionally it has been difficult to customize the look and feel of `<select>` elements because they contain internals that are styled at the operating system level, which can't be targeted using CSS. This includes the drop-down picker, arrow icon, and so on.
```

Author: Ha! I'd forgotten I ever said that, but I think it makes sense. Updated.

> Previously, the best available option aside from using a custom JavaScript library was to set an {{cssxref("appearance")}} value of `none` on the `<select>` element to strip away some of the OS-level styling, and then use CSS to customize the bits that can be styled. This technique is explained in [Advanced form styling](/en-US/docs/Learn_web_development/Extensions/Forms/Advanced_form_styling).

Reviewer 3: Sentence feels like it is a bit long.
```suggestion
Previously, the best available option — aside from using a custom JavaScript library — was to set an {{cssxref("appearance")}} value of `none` on the `<select>` element to strip away some of the OS-level styling, and then use CSS to customize the bits that can be styled. This technique is explained in [Advanced form styling](/en-US/docs/Learn_web_development/Extensions/Forms/Advanced_form_styling).
```

Author: good call; updated

> Customizable `<select>` elements provide a solution to these issues. They allow you to build examples like the following, using only HTML and CSS:

Reviewer 3: When I looked at the example I thought it was nice, but I couldn't tell what had been customized.
On FF, which does not support this API, you get a UI as shown below - and even from this it is subtle.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/3557d0f7-2d5a-467a-a8cb-c664bdb54a2a)

You might want to modify to make it more clear. Not sure of the words

```suggestion
Customizable `<select>` elements provide a solution to these issues. They allow you to build examples like the following, with customized selection icons and markers to show the selected item, using only HTML and CSS:
```

For bonus points, it would be great if the example used `selectedcontent`

Reviewer 3: Or maybe even add a note "On a browser that does not support this feature it might look like this". Something to think about.

Author: OK, quite a bit to unpack here. The thing is, there is a lot more customized here than what you've suggested in your edit. I've updated the preceding sentence to 

> Customizable `<select>` elements provide a solution to these issues. They allow you to build examples like the following, using only HTML and CSS, which are fully customized in supporting browsers but fall back to "classic" selects in non-supporting browsers:

Because this repeats the info in the sentence I added as a result of an earlier comment, I've now removed that sentence. 

You could do a lot with `<selectedcontent>`, but I chose to keep the example simple. Making the layout look ok in the closed select can get complicated quite quickly.

Reviewer 3: This is better. 

People will still wonder what customisation you have actually done in the example until you read down - since it isn't obvious. I don't think you can really fix this without a radical example, or possibly a side-by-side example. I understand why you would not want to do that.

Author: OK, to fix that issue, I've updated it a bit more to provide a list of the customizations that are done:

> Customizable `<select>` elements provide a solution to these issues. They allow you to build examples like the following, using only HTML and CSS, which are fully customized in supporting browsers. This includes `<select>` and drop-down picker layout, color scheme, icons, font, transitions, positioning, markers to indicate the selected icon, and more.
>
> (LIVE SAMPLE EMBED HERE)
>
> In addition, they provide a progressive enhancement on top of existing functionality, falling back to "classic" selects in non-supporting browsers.

Reviewer 3: Yes, that works well.

> {{EmbedLiveSample("full-render", "100%", "200px")}}

Reviewer 3: What is "full-render"? Anyway, this is a good example - would be good if it were a little taller though.

Author: "full-render" is part of the fancy new system by which you can render live examples. If you look at the opening code fences of the code snippets, you'll see that they all have `live-sample___full-render` included in them. "full render" causes all of the snippets that have `live-sample___full-render` included on them to be rendered in that live sample.

This is neat, as you can exactly pinpoint which snippets you want to include in each live sample. In this guide, I have made good use of this as I've started to build up the example and shown multiple intermediate stages.

To your point about live sample height — I agree; I've gone through and updated the height of all the examples so that they show the full select picker without scroll bars.

Reviewer 3: That's cool. As a separate thing, could you add information about this to https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/MDN/Writing_guidelines/Page_structures/Code_examples#interactive_examples ?

Author: Mmmmmmaybe ;-)

I'd file an issue about it and alert @Rumyra so she can decide who would be best to update the info.

Reviewer 3: Done https://github.com/mdn/content/issues/38868

You'll find out how to build this example in the sections below.

## What features comprise a customizable select?

> 

Reviewer 3: Slightly arguable, but I would pull the text from the first point below, and have it as the first thing in this section:

> Customizable selects are built on top of existing select functionality as progressive enhancements, meaning that customizable selects can be designed to fall back to "classic" selects in non-supporting browsers.

Author: Seems reasonable. I've done what you suggest.

You can build customizable `<select>` elements using the following HTML and CSS features:

- Plain old {{htmlelement("select")}}, {{htmlelement("option")}}, and {{htmlelement("optgroup")}} elements. These work just the same as in "classic" selects, except that they have additional permitted content types. The new features are built on top of existing select functionality as progressive enhancements, meaning that customizable selects can be designed to fall back to "classic" selects in non-supporting browsers.

> - A {{htmlelement("button")}} element included as the first child inside the `<select>` element, which wasn't previously allowed in "classic" selects. When this is included, it replaces the default "button" rendering of the closed `<select>` element. This is comonly known as the **select {{htmlelement("button")}}** (as it is the button you need to press to open the drop-down picker).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- A {{htmlelement("button")}} element included as the first child inside the `<select>` element, which wasn't previously allowed in "classic" selects. When this is included, it replaces the default "button" rendering of the closed `<select>` element. This is commonly known as the **select {{htmlelement("button")}}** (as it is the button you need to press to open the drop-down picker).
```

  > [!NOTE]

>   > The select `<button>` is {{glossary("inert")}} by default so that if interactive children (for example, links or buttons) are included inside it, it will still be treated like a single button for interaction purposes.

Reviewer 3: `inert` is a redlinkk

Reviewer 3: I also don't really get this? I think you mean that say your button had  button text that was an href link, that link would not be clickable? " treated like a single button" does imply this, but might be worth spelling out.

Author: Same comment as before about the inert glossary entry.

Good point about clarifying the inert behavior. I've updated the end of the sentence like this:

> ...it will still be treated like a single button for interaction purposes — for example, the child items won't be focusable or clickable.

Reviewer 3: That's really good. Thanks for the note about the glossary.

> - The {{htmlelement("selectedcontent")}} element, which can be included inside the `<select>` element's first child `<button>` element. This contains a clone of the currently-selected `<option>` element's content (created using {{domxref("Node.cloneNode", "cloneNode()")}} under the hood). In effect, this allows you to display the currently selected value inside the closed `<select>` element.

Reviewer 3: 1. > which can be included inside the `<select>` element's first child `<button>` element

   Does "first" here mean a select element can/should have multiple button elements?

2. Arguably what most important is what is this for. In any case, I prefer this to stating what the thing does "in effect" at the end.

```suggestion
- The {{htmlelement("selectedcontent")}} element can optionally be included inside the `<select>` element's first child `<button>` element in order to display the currently selected value inside the _closed_ `<select>` element.
  This contains a clone of the currently-selected `<option>` element's content (created using {{domxref("Node.cloneNode", "cloneNode()")}} under the hood).
```

Author: Yeah, I like this edit. Updated.

> - The {{cssxref("::picker()", "::picker(select)")}} pseudo-element, which targets the entire contents of the picker. The browser puts all of the `<select>` element's content that isn't the first child `<button>` inside the picker.

Reviewer 3: This is correct, but confused me on first read. This might be slightly easier to parse
```suggestion
- The {{cssxref("::picker()", "::picker(select)")}} pseudo-element, which targets the entire contents of the picker. This includes all elements inside the `<select>` element except the first child `<button>`.
```

Author: updated

- The {{cssxref("appearance")}} property value `base-select`, which opts the `<select>` element and the `::picker(select)` pseudo-element into the browser-defined default styles and behavior for customizable select.
- The {{cssxref(":open")}} pseudo-class, which targets the select `<button>` when the picker (`::picker(select)`) is open.

> - The {{cssxref("::picker-icon")}} pseudo-element, which targets the icon inside the select `<button>` — the down-facing arrow on the inline-end side.

Reviewer 3: It took me a second to work out which icon you mean, in part because it is both the down and right-facing arrow depending on state. Also because I don't know what the "inline-end side" means - probably if you're reading text inline it will be at the end of the text?

Maybe
 ```suggestion
- The {{cssxref("::picker-icon")}} pseudo-element, which targets the icon inside the select `<button>`.
  In the example this is the triangle icon that points up with the select is closed, and down when it is open.
```

Author: I feel like this suggestion is making a bit too much of a meal about this. I've updated it to 

> "...targets the icon inside the select button — the arrow that points down when the select is closed."

CSS folks will tend to know what "inline-end side" means — it is the end of the inline axis (horizontal in horizontal writing modes, vertical in vertical writing modes) — but I think it is worth getting rid of to remove that knowledge requirement.

- The {{cssxref(":checked")}} pseudo-class, which targets the currently-selected `<option>` element.
- The {{cssxref("::checkmark")}} pseudo-element, which targets the checkmark placed inside the currently-selected `<option>` element to provide a visual indication of which one is selected.

In addition, the `<select>` element and its drop-down picker have the following behavior assigned to them automatically:

- They have an invoker/popover relationship, as specified by the [Popover API](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Popover_API), which provides the ability to select the picker when open via the {{cssxref(":popover-open")}} pseudo-class. See [Using the Popover API](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Popover_API/Using) for more details of popover behavior.

> - They have an implicit anchor reference, meaning that the picker is automatically associated with the `<select>` element via [CSS anchor positioning](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_anchor_positioning). The browser default styles position the picker relative to the button (the anchor) and you can customize this position as explained in [Positioning elements relative to their anchor](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_anchor_positioning/Using#positioning_elements_relative_to_their_anchor). The browser default styles also define some position try fallbacks that reposition the picker if it is in danger of overflowing the viewport. Position try fallback are explained in [Handling overflow: try fallbacks and conditional hiding](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_anchor_positioning/Try_options_hiding).

Reviewer 3: Should it be position-try  ? (not sure)

Author: You are correct. Updated.

> [!NOTE]
> You can check browser support for customizable `<select>` by viewing the browser compatibility tables on the reference pages listed above.

> Let's look at all of the above features in action, by walking through the example you saw earlier.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Let's look at all of the above features in action, by walking through the example we showed at the top of the page.
```

Author: updated

<form>
  <p>
    <label for="pet-select">Select pet:</label>
    <select id="pet-select">
      <button>
        <selectedcontent></selectedcontent>
      </button>

      <option value="">Please select a pet</option>
      <option value="cat">
        <span class="icon" aria-hidden="true">🐱</span
        ><span class="option-label">Cat</span>
      </option>
      <option value="dog">
        <span class="icon" aria-hidden="true">🐶</span
        ><span class="option-label">Dog</span>
      </option>
      <option value="hamster">
        <span class="icon" aria-hidden="true">🐹</span
        ><span class="option-label">Hamster</span>
      </option>
      <option value="chicken">
        <span class="icon" aria-hidden="true">🐔</span
        ><span class="option-label">Chicken</span>
      </option>
      <option value="fish">
        <span class="icon" aria-hidden="true">🐟</span
        ><span class="option-label">Fish</span>
      </option>
      <option value="snake">
        <span class="icon" aria-hidden="true">🐍</span
        ><span class="option-label">Snake</span>
      </option>
    </select>
  </p>
</form>
```

> [!NOTE]

> > The [`aria-hidden="true"`](/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Reference/Attributes/aria-hidden) attribute is included on the icons so that they will be hidden from assistive technologies, avoiding the option values being annouced twice (for example, "cat cat").

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> The [`aria-hidden="true"`](/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Reference/Attributes/aria-hidden) attribute is included on the icons so that they will be hidden from assistive technologies, avoiding the option values being announced twice (for example, "cat cat").
```

Author: Fixed, ta

The example markup is nearly the same as "classic" `<select>` markup, with the following differences:

> - The `<button><selectedcontent></selectedcontent></button>` structure represents the select {{htmlelement("button")}}; the {{htmlelement("selectedcontent")}} element contains a clone of the currently-selected {{htmlelement("option")}} (created using {{domxref("Node.cloneNode", "cloneNode()")}} under the hood). This allows you to select and [adjust the styling of the selected `<option>` contents as shown inside the select button](#adjusting_the_styling_of_the_selected_option_contents_inside_the_select_button). If this structure is not included in your markup, the browser will fall back to rendering the selected option's text inside the default button, and you won't be able to style it as easily.

Reviewer 3: My preference, because it gets to relevant info faster.

```suggestion
- The `<button><selectedcontent></selectedcontent></button>` structure represents the select {{htmlelement("button")}}.
  Adding the {{htmlelement("selectedcontent")}} element causes the browser to clone the currently-selected {{htmlelement("option")}} inside the button, which you can then [style for display](#adjusting_the_styling_of_the_selected_option_contents_inside_the_select_button). If this structure is not included in your markup, the browser will fall back to rendering the selected option's text inside the default button, and you won't be able to style it as easily.
```

Author: updated, with a tweak

  > [!NOTE]

>   > You _can_ include arbitrary content inside the `<button>` to render whatever you want inside the closed `<select>`, but be careful when doing this. What you render can alter the `<select>` element's accessible value exposed to assistive technology.

Author: I've made the edit as suggested, except that I've kept "value". I'm referring to the value that is read out by a screen reader when you focus on this option.

> - The rest of the `<select>` contents represents the drop-down picker, which is usually limited to the `<option>` elements representing the different choices in the picker. You can include other content in the picker, but it is not recommended.

Reviewer 3: Maybe
```suggestion
- The rest of the `<select>` contents represents the drop-down picker, which is usually limited to the `<option>` elements representing the different choices in the picker. You can include other elements in the picker, but it is not recommended.
```

Author: Sure; I'm not convinced this makes a huge amount of different, but it doesn't hurt either. Updated.

Reviewer 2: content is really the better choice here, since someone can include other elements and the browser should hopefully ignore anything that isn't really meaningful to the experience.  but if content such as text is included in the picker, outside of options - then that'll change the way the browser needs to expose the picker so that it'll be exposed as a dialog to give screen reader users a signal that something is off about this popup, and they might want to search around the popup for other content that would otherwise be missed.

Author: Good point; I've changed it back ;-)

  > [!NOTE]
  > Because the `<option>` content can contain multi-level DOM sub-trees, not just text nodes, there are rules concerning how the browser should extract the [current `<select>` value](/en-US/docs/Web/API/HTMLSelectElement/value) via JavaScript. The selected `<option>` element's {{domxref("Node.textContent", "textContent")}} property value is retrieved, {{jsxref("String.prototype.trim", "trim()")}} is run on it, and the result is set as the `<select>` value.

This design allows non-supporting browsers to fall back to a classic `<select>` experience. The `<button><selectedcontent></selectedcontent></button>` structure will be ignored completely, and the non-text `<option>` contents will be stripped out to just leave the text node contents, but the result will still function.

## Opting in to the custom select rendering

> To opt-in to the custom select functionality, your `<select>` element and its drop-down picker (represented by the `::picker(select)` pseudo-element) both need to have an {{cssxref("appearance")}} value of `base-select` set on them:

Reviewer 3: What you're actually doing here is removing any existing styles on the element or picker - or at least that is what I assume from the name "`base-select`".

Let's be very clear about what we're doing.

```suggestion
To opt-in to the custom select functionality, you first need to remove the base styles applied to `<select>` element and its drop-down picker (represented by the `::picker(select)` pseudo-element) by the browser.
To do this both need to have an {{cssxref("appearance")}} value of `base-select` set on them:
```

Author: Technically, when you apply this `appearance` value, you remove the default OS-level styling/rendering that selects get, which means that instead, the base browser styles for selects come into play, and you also enable the custom select functionality. 

I've thought about this a bit, and updated the paragraph to:

> To opt-in to the custom select functionality and minimal browser base styles (and remove the OS-provided styling), your `<select>` element and its drop-down picker (represented by the `::picker(select)` pseudo-element) both need to have an {{cssxref("appearance")}} value of `base-select` set on them:

I don't think we need to say "so that you can then add your own customizations" — this feels a bit obvious, and becomes self-evident as the article progresses.

Reviewer 3: I like this more than what I suggested.

  margin: 0 auto;
}

h2 {
  font-size: 1.2rem;
}

p {
  display: flex;
  gap: 10px;
}

label {
  width: fit-content;
  align-self: center;
}

select {
  flex: 1;
}
```

You can choose to opt-in just the `<select>` element to the new functionality, leaving the picker with the default OS styling, but in most cases, you'll want to opt-in both. You can't opt-in the picker without opting in the `<select>` element.

Once this is done, the result is a very plain rendering of a `<select>` element:

{{EmbedLiveSample("plain-render", "100%", "200px")}}

You are now free to style this in any way you want. To begin with, the `<select>` element has custom {{cssxref("border")}}, {{cssxref("background")}} (which changes on {{cssxref(":hover")}} or {{cssxref(":focus")}}), and {{cssxref("padding")}} values set, plus a {{cssxref("transition")}} so that the background change animates smoothly:

```css live-sample___second-render live-sample___third-render live-sample___fourth-render live-sample___full-render
select {
  border: 2px solid #ddd;
  background: #eee;
  padding: 10px;
  transition: 0.4s;
}

select:hover,
select:focus {
  background: #ddd;
}
```

## Styling the picker icon

> To style the icon inside the select `<button>` — the little down-facing arrow on the inline-end side — you can target it with the {{cssxref("::picker-icon")}} pseudo-element. In the following code gives the icon a custom {{cssxref("color")}} and a `transition` so that changes to its {{cssxref("rotate")}} property are smoothly animated:

Reviewer 3: See https://github.com/mdn/content/pull/38470/files#r2011091218 regarding how this "arrow" is described.

Author: updated as per

> To style the icon inside the select `<button>` — the little down-facing arrow on the inline-end side — you can target it with the {{cssxref("::picker-icon")}} pseudo-element. In the following code gives the icon a custom {{cssxref("color")}} and a `transition` so that changes to its {{cssxref("rotate")}} property are smoothly animated:

Reviewer 3: Typo "In the following code gives the icon "

Author: Duh. Updated to "The following code gives the icon..."

```css live-sample___second-render live-sample___third-render live-sample___fourth-render live-sample___full-render
select::picker-icon {
  color: #999;
  transition: 0.4s rotate;
}
```

Next up, `::picker-icon` is combined with the {{cssxref(":open")}} pseudo-class — which targets the select `<button>` only when the drop-down picker is open — to give the icon a `rotate` value of `180deg` when the `<select>` is opened.

```css live-sample___second-render live-sample___third-render live-sample___fourth-render live-sample___full-render
select:open::picker-icon {
  rotate: 180deg;
}
```

Let's have a look at the work so far — note how the picker arrow rotates smoothly through 180 degrees when the `<select>` opens and closes:

{{EmbedLiveSample("second-render", "100%", "200px")}}

## Styling the drop-down picker

> The drop-down picker can be targeted using the {{cssxref("::picker()", "::picker(select)")}} pseudo-element. As mentioned earlier, the picker contains everything inside the `<select>` element that isn't the button and the `<selectedcontent>`. In our example, this means all the `<option>` elements and ther contents.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The drop-down picker can be targeted using the {{cssxref("::picker()", "::picker(select)")}} pseudo-element. As mentioned earlier, the picker contains everything inside the `<select>` element that isn't the button and the `<selectedcontent>`. In our example, this means all the `<option>` elements and their contents.
```

Author: Typo fixed; ta!

}
```

The list of transitioned properties features `opacity`, however it also includes two discrete properties whose values are set by the browser default styles:

- {{cssxref("display")}}
  - : The `display` values changes from `none` to `block` when the popover changes state from hidden to shown. This needs to be animated to ensure that other transitions are visible.
- {{cssxref("overlay")}}
  - : The `overlay` value changes from `none` to `auto` when the popover changes state from hidden to shown, to promote it to the {{glossary("top layer")}}, then back again when it is hidden to remove it. This needs to be animated to ensure the removal of the popover from the top layer is deferred until the transition completes, ensuring the transition is visible.

> [!NOTE]
> The [`allow-discrete`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transition-behavior#allow-discrete) value is needed to enable discrete property animations.

Next, the picker is selected in the showing state using `::picker(select):popover-open` and given an `opacity` value to `1` — this is the end state of the transition:

```css live-sample___full-render
::picker(select):popover-open {
  opacity: 1;
}
```

> Finally, because the picker is being transitioned while it is moving from `display: none` to a `display` value that makes it visible, the transition's starting state has to be specified inside a {{cssxref("@starting-state")}} block:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Finally, because the picker is being transitioned while it is moving from `display: none` to a `display` value that makes it visible, the transition's starting state has to be specified inside a {{cssxref("@starting-style")}} block:
```

Author: good catch; updated!

- They have an invoker/popover relationship, as specified by the [Popover API](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Popover_API), which provides the ability to select the picker when open via the {{cssxref(":popover-open")}} pseudo-class. See [Using the Popover API](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Popover_API/Using) for more details of popover behavior.
- They have an implicit anchor reference, meaning that the picker is automatically associated with the `<select>` element via [CSS anchor positioning](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_anchor_positioning). The browser default styles position the picker relative to the button (the anchor) and you can customize this position as explained in [Positioning elements relative to their anchor](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_anchor_positioning/Using#positioning_elements_relative_to_their_anchor). The browser default styles also define some position-try fallbacks that reposition the picker if it is in danger of overflowing the viewport. Position try fallback are explained in [Handling overflow: try fallbacks and conditional hiding](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_anchor_positioning/Try_options_hiding).

> [!NOTE]

> > You can check browser support for customizable `<select>` by viewing the browser compatibility tables on the reference pages listed above.

Reviewer 3: Might be worth having as "such as" and point to selectedcontent or similar. Reason being that there are a lot of links above, and not all of them are related to this case. Of course roll out in another browser might be partial, but I still think this would be a helpful link.

Author: Good call; I've updated the note to

> [!NOTE]
> You can check browser support for customizable `<select>` by viewing the browser compatibility tables on the reference pages for related features such as {{htmlelement("selectedcontent")}}, {{cssxref("::picker()", "::picker(select)")}}, and {{cssxref("::checkmark")}}.

Our example now renders like this:

{{EmbedLiveSample("third-render", "100%", "370px")}}

## Adjusting the styling of the selected option contents inside the select button

> If you select any pet option from the last few live examples, you'll notice a problem — the pet icons cause the select button to increase in height, which also changes the position of the picker icon, and there is no spacing between the option icon and label — not a great look.

Reviewer 3: Not really needed 
```suggestion
If you select any pet option from the last few live examples, you'll notice a problem — the pet icons cause the select button to increase in height, which also changes the position of the picker icon, and there is no spacing between the option icon and label.
```

Author: ok, removed.
